---
layout: blog-post
categories: blog
title: "Your Loss of Free Will is The Product"
description: "The scourge of social media and its hidden costs"
image: assets/img/blog/freewill.png
date: 2022-12-03
tags: thoughts
---

Social media services are not "free-to-use". You pay for it with your information. This is not a novel thought or anything. In fact, this line of thinking has become unoriginal and borderline hackneyed. It's the consensus amongst pretty much everyone - even to those who are inextricably addicted to Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, Reddit - that less social media usage would improve their quality of life, but perhaps less people agree on the proper course of action, or the severity of the situation. I would argue we pay with a lot more than just our information.

My opinion is that social media is utterly, unquestionably detrimental to our mental health, and to the health of our society at a large. I think it will eventually become the "smoking" of 21st century. The future generations will look back at our open embrace of these technologies with amusement; the same way we look at how people thought smoking was not associated with increased lung cancer risk, or how enforcing seat belt laws was a bad idea (because people thought they would be trapped by seat belts in a traffic accident, thereby causing more harm than good.)

There is no doubt many good that has come out of social media, but just look at the growing list of negatives. It has destoryed our attention span, disrupted our dopamine circuitry to make us depressed and unmotivated, enabled harmful and unrealistic social comparison that robs us of happiness and fulfillment. It has amplified misinformation and conspiracy thinking, vastly amplified political division and tribalism, created a crisis in our epistomology where truth is subjective.

More importantly to me, it is algorithmically manipulating us, robbing us of our privacy (as we've seen with Cambridge Analytica). Worse yet, it easily saps over 600 hours of our lives each year. What could you have done with those 600 hours? Perhaps learn a new language, learn a new musical instrument, hike the Appalachian trail? The opportunity cost is very real.

If our life experience is indeed equal what we have paid attention to, then the algorithms of social media today is literally robbing us of our lives.



## "Ad Companies Are the Real Customers"

On my way to work today, I listened to an episode of the Sam Harris podcast. He was speaking with the American computer scientist Jaron Lanier on the topic of our modern digital lives. The whole episode was entertaining and insightful, but it was near the end when Jaron made a statement that was completely eye-opening for me. The common one-liner goes something like this:

> "With social media, advertising companies are the real customers. You are the product"

Jaron Lanier pointed out that this isn't technically correct. To be more precise

> "Your loss of free will is the product"

"Drive purchasing decisions" is just a euphemism for psychological manipulation. To the advertising industry, the human psyche is an open-book. If we really value our freedom and independent thought/judgement, then social media is the worst thing on the planet.



## Illusion of Free Will

You might think you are personally immune to ads, that you are rational and educated enough to make independent choices, devoid of outer interferences. That's pretty delusional. If anything, it counts as a double win for the advertising industry.

Great ads are stealthy. They embed themselves into the corners of your subconscious mind. Then one day, it ever so slightly tips the scale and influences your decision towards one direction rather than another. Worse yet, ads don't even have to be stealthy to work. Ads that are unabashedly abtrusive, to the point that you are fully aware of being advertised to, works just the same.

I think this idea is perfectly captured in the Chris Nolan Movie "Inception". For those unfamiliar with the movie, it is about a crew of professional "dream thieves" that use a fictional device to infiltrate another person's dream, or subconsciousness. From there, they can either extract personal information, or plant dangerous ideas.

The movie follows Cobb (played by Leonardo DiCaprio), an experienced dream thief, who assembles a crew to infiltrate the mind of an heir to a multi-billion dollar national corporation. Their mission is to destory the future of this corporation. 

Strip away the mind-bending action sequences and bombastic explosions, their entire objective is to plant a single idea in the subject's mind. "To not follow in your father's foot steps, and build something new!" I thought this was just hilarious! When looked at in isolation, it seems like a relatively harmless, perhaps trite message that one could read from a shitty self-help book. But this seemingly innocuous idea, is able to bring down a multi-national corporation.

So the next time you see an advertisement, think of it as Leonardo DiCaprio trying to embed ideas into your subconsciousness.



## Your Attention, Your Time, Your Life

Quoting Mark Manson:

> Last week, I logged onto Facebook to see a story about a man who got drunk, cut off his friend's penis and then fed it to a dog. This was followed by a story of a 100-year-old woman who had never seen the ocean before. Then eight ways I can totally know I'm a 90's kid. Then 11 steps to make me a "smarter Black Friday Shopper," an oxymoron if I ever saw one. 
>
> This is life now: one constant, never-ending stream of non sequiturs and self-referential garbage that passes in through our eyes and out of our brains at the speed of a touchscreen

According to American pragmatist William James: "At the end of our days, our life experience will equal what we have paid attention to." In his book "The Attention Merchants", Tim Wu summarizes our current condition perfectly:

> If we desire a future that avoids the enslavement of the propaganda state as well as the narcosis of the consumer and celebrity culture, we must first acknowledge the preciousness of our attention and resolve not to part with it so cheaply and unthinkingly as we so often have. And then we must act, individually and collectively, to make our attention our own again, and so reclaim ownership of The very experience of living.

