---
layout: blog-post
categories: blog
title: "Favorite Movies"
description: "Tinkering with AirTable and IMDB APIs"
image: assets/img/blog/movies.png
date: 2023-04-04
tags: blog
---



<iframe class="airtable-embed" src="https://airtable.com/embed/shro1eVbByPMzyoNE?backgroundColor=blue&viewControls=on" frameborder="0" onmousewheel="" width="100%" height="833" style="background: transparent; border: 1px solid #ccc;"></iframe>


List View:

<iframe class="airtable-embed" src="https://airtable.com/embed/shrzHWfYc2QmG0SKv?backgroundColor=blue&viewControls=on" frameborder="0" onmousewheel="" width="100%" height="533" style="background: transparent; border: 1px solid #ccc;"></iframe>

*Created using [AirTable](https://airtable.com/) and [PyMovieDb](https://github.com/itsmehemant7/PyMovieDb)*

<hr>

I love watching movies! It has to be one of the greatest joys in life. I can't think of a more appealing, and more affordable form of entertainment. Isn't it wonderful being whisked away into another world for a few hours? Fully immersed in an epic plot line, fully invested emotionally with the tragedies and triumphs of its characters. To quote Roger Ebert: "We live in a box of space and time. Movies are windows in its walls".

Ever since I bought a projector last year, I've been voraciously consuming motion pictures from obscure Japanese arthouse films to epic summer blockbusters. Nothing like having a 85" screen in your living room. I try to restrain myself, but I tend to have a spotty record when it comes to that. I watch about two films a week, and I have several major 2023 film openings marked on my calendar. 

I don't have any streaming subscriptions like Netflix or HBO. Instead, I curate a ever-growing list of films I want to watch, then I rent them for about $4 a piece on Amazon Prime Videos. The annual cost works out to be the same, and I get to protect my precious attention from the trap of mindlessly scrolling through millions of hours of content and yet still feel like "there is nothing to watch" (been there done that). Being deliberate with what I watch has been one of my best decisions in the last five years.

I don't know what compels me to keep a list of (almost) every movie I've ever watched. I just like keeping list of stuff. Maybe I was a librarian in a past life. It gives me a sense of order, clarity, and productivity; like I am somehow reversing the process of entropy. Now I think about it, a lot of my hobbies can be described that way; as attempts to bring order to chaos, clarity over confusion, improvement over degradation. 

I'm getting sidetracked here... Anyways, the idea of a personal movie gallery list has been floating on my mind for quite some time now. When I discovered AirTables, I knew I found the right tool for the job! With the help of some open-source IMDB query tool, I was able to extract the movie posters, tags, and descriptions too.






