---
layout: blog-post
categories: blog
title: "Writing is Thinking"
description: "Je vais essayer"
image: assets/img/blog/write.png
date: 2023-02-17
tags: thoughts
---

## To Try

Roughly four or five years ago, a 19-page pdf document changed my life. It was an essay composition guide written by Jordan Peterson for a class he was teaching at the University of Toronto. The document was being shared within the online self-improvement circles and it was generating quite a lot of buzz. I still have it on my computer and I still read it every once in a while. (<a href="/assets/Essay Guide by Jordan Peterson.pdf">Download Link</a>).

> "Don’t ever underestimate the power of words. Without them, we would still be living in trees. When you [write] an essay, you are harnessing the full might of culture to your life. [Even if you think you] are doing something stupid, trivial and dull, [remember,] you are conquering the unknown."

It wasn't so much his advice on <u>how</u> to write an essay that left such a profound impact on me, I find his methods overly mechanical and rigid anyways. Instead, it was his advice on <u>why</u> one should write essays that is positively edifying.

The word "essay" originates from the French verb "essayer", which means to try. Therefore, the act of writing an essay is to attempt - with the best of one's ability - to explore some topic of interest. For most of our lives, we write because we are compelled to by a teacher, or a professor, for the sake of demonstrating some competency in some subject matter. However, the true reward of writing extends far beyond passing a class and eventually getting your diploma. With no doubt in my mind, learning to write is the most important skill one can acquire. Why?

**To write is to think**. To write is to exercise your ability in idea formulation and organization. Through writing, we turn incoherent, jumbled thoughts into coherent, informed, and sophisticated set of ideas about something we find important. There is no substitute for the writing process. There can be no thought without expression, no content without form. Whatever profound ideas you may have in your head, they simply don't exist until you can write them down.

Writing also improves your ability to make cogent arguments, organize thoughts on the fly, and communicate effectively. It clarifies your thinking and gives you an efficient mind, one that is grounded and well-trained to spot bad ideas and fallacious thinking. In short, it makes you a formidable individual no matter what professional endeavor you choose to undertake.

> "Consider your success over the course of a lifetime. Here is something to think about: the person who can formulate and communicate the best argument almost always wins. If you want a job, you have to make a case for yourself. If you want a raise, you have to convince someone that you deserve it. If you are trying to convince someone of the validity of your idea, you have to debate its merits successfully."

> "If you sharpen your capacity to think and to communicate as a consequence of writing, you are better armed. The pen is mightier than the sword, as the saying goes. This is no cheap cliché. Ideas change the world, particularly when they are written."

But writing isn't just some Nietzschen Will to Power. Being able to write well means you'll be more resilient to the vicissitudes of life and the inevitable hardships. By putting feeling into words, you bring clarity to your mind, and in turn you will be less ailed by unnecessary stress and vague emotional irritations.

Lastly and most importantly, learning to write hones our ability to think critically, the want of which in a populace would most certainly be the end to a functioning democracy. 

In conclusion, write! And teach others to write! Protect yourself from superstitious beliefs, foolish fads, and dangerous ideologies. Equip yourself with the ability to differentiate between good ideas intelligently presented, and bad ideas put forth by conspiracy theorist, populist demagogues, and unskilled thinkers. Write as if your way of life depends on it, as if the healthy functioning of our society depends on it, for they most certainly do. 
