---
layout: blog-post
categories: blog
title: "Shake and Bake; Fake and Make"
description: "Don't be yourself. Create yourself"
image: assets/img/blog/shakeandbake.png
date: 2023-01-30
tags: thoughts
---

"Be yourself", we are often told. What an awful advice. Aside from being unbearably cliché, It's not even useful. At the very least, you should <u>know</u> yourself first before you can <u>be</u> yourself. Seems like a simple enough two-part process, except the first part might take your entire lifetime to figure out.

I've been "faking it until I'm making it" since high school. In many ways, I've been quite successful at completely altering my identity. There was a time when I hated running and dreaded reading. Now I take great pleasure in both. I remember getting unbelievably stressed when essays are due in English class. Now I find writing a pleasant pastime. I used to mumble and slur words, then about a year of speech practice [with a cork in my mouth](https://www.wikihow.com/Improve-Your-Clarity-of-Speech) dramatically improved my speaking clarity. Is my authentic self so elusive because my identity is constantly in flux? Or am I just confused? The central claim of existentialism is: "existence precedes essence" right? Am I wrong to believe that the self is malleable? Which part of me should I keep? Which part of me should I subject to self-immolation? 

I've never really identified with any particular clique in school, nor any archetype portrayed in the media. When I was growing up, Hollywood's portrayal of people like me is downright anemic, emasculating, borderline demeaning. I don't particularly identify with being a nerd, a tech geek, nor a kung fu master. It didn't feel right to put on such fragile veneer anyways. I sought other avenues of self-expression. I am a tennis player; I am an engineer; I am a fan of kpop; I am a gamer. Is liking the show "Friends" and "The Office" a core part of who I am? None of these felt right. The answer to the question of "who am I?" is all too elusive. Perhaps we should be glad that we're not so easily definable. These ready-made identities have always felt lazy and inauthentic. Jean-Paul Sartre coined a term for this: Bad Faith.

> Let us consider this waiter in the café. His movement is quick and forward, a little too precise, a little too rapid. He bends forward a little too eagerly; his voice, his eyes express an interest a little too solicitous for the order of the customer. Finally there he returns, trying to imitate in his walk the inflexible stiffness of some kind of automaton while carrying his tray with the recklessness of a tight-rope-walker by putting it in a perpetually unstable, perpetually broken equilibrium which he perpetually re-establishes by a light movement of the arm and hand. All his behavior seems to us a game. He applies himself to changing his movements as if they were mechanisms, the one regulating the other; his gestures and even his voice seems to be mechanisms; he gives himself the quickness and pitiless rapidity of things. He is playing, he is amusing himself. But what is he playing? We need not watch long before we can explain it: he is playing at *being* a waiter in a café. There is nothing there to surprise us. - Jean-Paul Sartre in "Being and Nothingness"

Here's another amusing quote from Jean-Paul Sartre: “I am what I am not; I am not what I am”. The idea Sartre is trying to convey in this wordplay is that we are made of both facticity (facts about ourselves; what we are) and transcendence (our potential; what we are not yet). Perhaps from an existentialist point of view, we should “create ourselves”, a continuous process that only ends when we become pure facticities. In other words, perhaps the only time we can truly "be ourselves" is when we are dead.
